Again, as we set out, just if we haven't already, continuing to just connect with our pure
motivation,
our joy, our appreciation, renunciation thoughts, reflecting on the four thoughts that turn the
mind towards what's true and reliable, which is the beautiful, supreme teachings of the
Buddha Shakyamuni and Guru Padmasambhava that we are so fortunate to have met in this life,
and then truly then expanding that, connecting with the precious Bodhichitta, thinking that
this time now and every moment of our lives and all our lives can just only bring fruits
of benefit for all beings. And then connecting with, again, our closeness feeling, our longing,
our trust and devotion and joy for our teachers and for the lineage and for towards just the
true, absolute nature of everything.
[Silence]
And so, I thought today, just reflect a little bit more, continuing with some thoughts and
just reflections on the Bodhichitta. And again, I'm here kind of talking, spokesperson, but
each one of us, each one of you, we've all had some practice, we've all had some life,
we've been so graced with receiving so many teachings and we've contemplated them, we've
practiced them, so of course the Dharma is so vast, so rich, so just the spirit of my
talking is also kind of honoring everyone's realizations and just wishing we all just
connect more and more purely, more and more naturally, more and more authentically, joyfully
with the true nature, with our relative Bodhichitta, which will usher us to the absolute Bodhichi
tta
realization. And so when we're making our Bodhichitta aspirations, you know, one thing
I thought to just reflect a little on is, we say, "From now until attaining the heart
of enlightenment." No, no, no, that's our refuge, but from then too, we're going to
complete the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings. So just thought, we're
just again, just remembering, reminding the frame of how do we frame all the infinite
mother sentient beings. And then also within Bodhichitta, we've talked to some degree on
our aspirational Bodhichitta, but then also talked a little bit more on our actualizing
Bodhichitta. So who are all these mother sentient parent beings? Like we said before, in the
teachings, the only difference between fully realized Buddha and ordinary sentient being
is the degree to which we recognize the nature or not. And that means how caught up we are
in the causes of samsara, the causes of suffering, which is what all sentient parent beings because
we're not recognizing the nature as it is. And due to that, we're caught up and carried
away by our ego clinging, by our grasping and negative emotions, clinging to things
as being solid, independent, permanent. And then so while we all have the same beautiful
absolute true nature of wisdom, love, compassion, which is absolute Bodhichitta, we sentient
beings haven't recognized that in different degrees. So who as the objects of our boundless,
equanimous Bodhichitta, you know, aspiring, connecting with our the four boundless thoughts
of all sentient beings having happiness in its causes, being free of suffering and its
causes, never being separated from the ultimate happiness, which is completely free of suffering,
all fulfillments having great joy for all fulfillments, especially the ultimate. And
then if everyone could be not so caught up in friends and enemies, hopes and fears. So
we're going to actualize that. But all these beings, of course, we know we've heard are
none other than the Buddha classically had the six realms. So we've all again, we've
heard about suffering beings, but it's good to think about what are the six realms and
what are their causes according to the teachings and there's so many great texts, you know,
words of my perfect teacher, for example, really goes through in detail, some of the
some of the aspects of what beings encounter in the different realms. So I'm not going
to spend a lot of time talking about that now, but just kind of briefly go over that.
Right. So what are the six realms? We'll start at the bottom and go to the top. So there's
what's called the hell realms, which are inhabited by hell beings. There's the hungry ghost realms
and inhabited by the hungry ghosts, the Yiddah. There's the animal realms and all the animals.
There's the human realm, all the humans, the asuras and the gods. So these are the six
realms of beings. And then we've also heard in the teachings, right? There's the three
realms. Do we know what the three realms are? So that's what's known as the desire realm,
the form realm and the formless realm. And so how do the six classes of beings relate
to those realms? So in the teachings, the Buddha said actually, the gods are the only
samsara beings who experience all three realms. The desire realm goes from all the hell realms,
all the hungry ghost realms, all the human realms, and then a whole bunch of even the
god realms exist in what's called the desire realm. And what is that? It's mostly perpetuated
by desire, the form realms, only certain section of the gods inhabit and experience. And those
are perhaps just more perfect symmetries. The formless realms are again, only the gods,
the formless realms. These are just like it sounds. There's no form. It's kind of the
result of just really attaining the ability to dwell and abide in the real formless samadis
or concentrations. So there's no experience really whatsoever, very subtle. But the main
thing with all of these realms is right there in the teachings, we of course we can apply
it to our own experience. But all these realms, the Buddha taught are as real as rainbows.
That is to say that the hell realm is just as real as this experience we're having right
now, as well as all the other realms. And so then, you know, there's suffering and there's
the causes of suffering. So just quickly going over that in the hell realms, there is many
sections of the hell realms. There's the hot hells, the cold hells, the kind of more ephemeral
boundary hells, but essentially the main suffering of the hell realms is just intense unrelenting
pain and fear of all kinds of ways and being super sensitive physically and emotionally.
And it's said then too, what are the main causes of experience the hell realms is anger
within all the poisons we all share acting upon angry hatred thoughts with our body speech
and mind when they're fully ripened is what we experience in the hell realms. The hungry
ghost realms are just like it sounds. The sufferings of the hungry ghost is just never
getting satisfaction, never having what you want, either due to the capacities of one's
body and one's mind and perceptions, never at being able to attain something outside
that we totally crave and need for our health and happiness or feel we need for our health
and happiness. So for example, having huge giant bodies with tiny mouths, the sides of
pinholes, you know, or always craving being so thirsty and hungry, but when we get to
the food or water, it makes us sick or it's evaporated. It's just like those kinds of
situations. Then the animal realms and the causes, the cause of suffering in the hungry
ghost is said is what I think are greed and stinginess. The suffering of the animal realms
is primarily a great degree of not knowing of dullness and being subject to being preyed
upon and taken advantage of, your body used to sustain others or enslaved to help others
or being just, you know, preyed upon. And the causes of being born in the animal realm
are primarily what is said kind of laziness, sleep, just indulging in sleepiness, laziness.
The human realm. Now that's those three realms too. Again, maybe I'm saying things we all
know, but again, the main point here is have the frame, but then to really look into those,
think about those, read more about these things, contemplate them more, bring them into our
practice and here specifically our bodhichitta practice, which inhabits every aspect of our
nundra, bodhichitta. So these three lower realms, hell realms, hungry ghost realm, animal
realm, what we talk about when we hear about the lower realms, then there's what's known
as the higher realms, which are the three other human asura or demi-god and the god realms.
So then again, in the nutshell, the humans, what are we humans, our main suffering? Yeah.
Well there's a lot of them. We can of course touch on all of these sufferings, but really
the main suffering of humans is often doubt, hesitation, poverty mentality, birth, old
age, sickness, death, busyness, the causes of being born human. I think a lot of good
deeds because right out of all these realms, it's known as the most favorable because it's
got a good balance of all these things. In the asuras, the demi-gods, almost gods, their
main suffering is being racked with jealousy and envy. Jealousy is sometimes too, I was
looking at, jealousy can be, what's the difference between jealousy and envy? We can apply this
to our own experience. Neither one of them is good. Usually jealousy, there's some sense
of protecting something we have or think we have, being jealous of losing it. Envy however,
we recognize we don't have it and we want it and we're kind of hate those who have it.
It's not a very happy place to be. And the asuras are full of jealousy. They're always
at war with who? With the gods. Who they can perceive some degree of the gods and they
want what those gods have. They're completely racked with envy and jealousy for what they
have. And then the god realms. Of course, and then again, there's different levels that
go even up into the form and formless, but the gods have very enjoyable experiences.
Desire realm, form realm, formless realm. There's no suffering until the very end. So it said
the suffering of the gods is when all of their positive karma has ripened and been exhausted
and now the end of their life has come. So the god realms are very pleasant but they're
not liberation. So one's beautiful body begins to smell and sweat and age. One's beautiful
blossoms as far as this desire realm start to fade. All of our friends run away. And
then through our clairvoyance and our wider vision of relative truth, we also can perceive
what's happening. Waking up from the spell of all of the wonderful life we've had and
see how we've exhausted and where we're going due to our next karma is that will ripen.
Which because often it's set in the god realms, it's exhausted, we then fall down to the lower
realms. So the suffering of the gods is called falling down. The cause of being in the god
realm is sometimes they say pride and arrogance. So we can look a lot more at those sufferings
but just beginning to just use those as little simple frames to really get specific and not
have sentient beings just be abstract. Who is the object of compassion? All of us are.
And so many others that we have no idea are there but due to the omniscience and kindness
of the Buddha kind of introducing us to this view that there's more, there's just an ocean
of samsara there, right? And samsara is a no-win situation. There's temporary comforts and
relief in samsara but no final resting place. It's like trying to they say trying to find
comfort on the head of a pin. So we aspire to generate our bodhicitta to realize the
absolute bodhicitta, the heart of enlightenment, the mind of enlightenment, our Buddha nature
in order to truly be a benefit to others. So we actualize that through what we call
the six paramitas. And of course they're so renowned. All of the relative actualizing
bodhicitta path is all contained within the six paramitas. And then just two paramita
gets translated to transcendental perfections of generosity, transcendental perfection of
morality, transcendental perfection of patience, transcendental perfection of joyful effort,
the perfection of concentration, transcendental perfection of wisdom. But that transcendental,
I think the main thing to really connect with in our mind and heart is it's transcendental
because we're not so caught up in ourselves. We're really trying to upturn the cause of
suffering for ourselves and others, which is what it all comes back to our ignorance of
how things are and more fundamentally are being caught up with our grasping and our
to negative emotions, all the causes of the six realms and upturning them through those
things. So, you know, one thing to just to remember as we're doing our bodhicitta section
of the nundra, we're, we're making our bodhicitta vow in that one section, but keeping bodhicitta,
the supreme bodhicitta, it's the heart of all the Dharma. It's without it, where would
we be? We'd have no Buddha, we'd have no teachings that show us the way to our own
nature. So from now until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and
happiness of all sentient parent beings. So that is in essence is right perfecting the
six paramitas, which is turning our ego. So one thing just to remember is this renowned
practice of Tonglen is also really getting to that heart of Tonglen exchanging our own
happiness, giving away all of our happiness, receiving all the suffering of others. Because
right that's kind of the opposite of what we're inclined to do. So like practicing Tonglen
as we're doing our bodhicitta practice is one thing we can do. And so, you know, there's
different ways of doing the Tonglen practice, you know, one really classic way is where
we're again, we're riding the breath. So as we exhale, we're giving away all happiness.
And we can see that as like bright light, just going out, pervading all these vast realms
of samsara going to every single individual being who's a whole universe. And then we're,
as we breathe in, we're absorbing all the suffering and the causes of suffering of every
single one of those infinite sentient beings. And they sometimes they say picturing that
as just like, you know, just black mass, we're just absorbing, inhaling it all. And then
exhaling just all of our all the virtues we have all of the happiness we've had in this
in all our lives, giving that to all beings absorbing. And then didn't don't go can't
save him, but she had beautiful description to that. That's like, that's like picturing
all these beings kind of lost in the fog and the mist. And it's like, it just evaporates
and they're in the pure, clear sight. I'm gonna absorb that. And then really taking
in that suffering, see what that's like. But another aspect of that we can really kind
of connect, but look to that suffering, look to where it is, how it is, where is it, you
know, applying those instructions. But also we can then also just picture. It's almost
like our bodhicitta is like a vast infinite sun. So as we're exhaling that light, that
grace, that joy, freedom, peace, all good qualities, all the fulfillments, temporary
and ultimate, just awakening and all the confusion, just evaporating from all the minds and hearts
of every single living being. And then we're absorbing all of that black mass of suffering
and its causes. But then too, letting that just be like a drop of rain on the face of
the sun, as far as our emptiness awareness, just using that visualization to taking on
all the illusory suffering. And then there's other forms of, you know, we can expand just
as the pure light, but also they say to something in the teaching picture ourselves, we just
visualize ourselves as a wish fulfilling jewel, you know, with the crown ornaments, just able
to fulfill all the wishes of every single being. And put in that skillful means of the
bodhicitta, which means every wish is fulfilled, that only connects beings with true happiness
and peace. Or emanate as many bodies as we can into every realm, bringing peace and protection,
you know, and exchanging that way. Or just, you know, just, we can just totally use our
imagination. Like Shantay Deva says, let me be a bridge, a boat, a medicine, just really
use our imagination to actualize our bodhicitta. Think about, for example, you know, like going
and giving protection to all of the beings who are being, you know, preyed upon or attacked,
giving them perfect protection, or emanating as the perfect medicine for all incurable
diseases and all sickness, just appearing in the lives of beings, really being the true
medicine to bring healing, even though it's temporary. But again, through our bodhicitta,
that means we're connecting all beings with liberation, you know, emanating to free all
of the beings enslaved and ensnared by their own self cast spells, or being, you know,
imprisoned or captured in any way, being free, but free in the best of ways. So it goes on
and on, but just really using, you know, thinking about as we're doing our bodhicitta practice,
using some of these instructions we've received on just kind of tonglen or kind of actualizing
our bodhicitta. Then of course, that's within the frame of our nundra practice itself. But
keeping that spirit of loving kindness, that's what it all boils down to openness and open
mind and open heart, trying to be appropriate as we're in the world, just keeping our bodhicitta
commitment there and looking to when we start to lose it, finding that boundary point between
when we lose our mindfulness and our alertness and our conscientiousness, when we start to
space out and get caught up in our negative emotions, being aware of that place and letting
it take us as much as our practice.
So that's enough talking. Now we'll just do our practice. So yeah, the main point bodhicitta,
the heart of enlightenment, it's the source of all the Dharma. It's our very true nature.
Because on the absolute level, bodhicitta is our Buddha nature. And we're all again, we're
purifying, we're removing our obscurations and their causes, bringing out our bodhicitta,
using generating our bodhicitta through the beautiful skillful means of our relative bodhicitta,
our aspiration and our actualizing. And it's not going to be perfect when we start, but
that's the path. But keeping with it, keeping our courage, our commitment, means our joy,
our devotion, really mingling our mind with the mind of enlightenment with the guru, listening
to our wisdom, letting ourselves rest in just no thought and the no thought bodhicitta too.
When we're really connecting with our bodhicitta, it's one of the benefits. It's pervading us
at all times. We can use our imagination and engage with our intellect with bodhicitta
motivation, but also like really having it be heartfelt and just an atmosphere that's
pervading. It begins to be inseparable from our renunciation. It becomes inseparable from
our devotion. They're all mingled. We'll do our practice now. We'll just rest for a few
moments in silence and then we'll begin our nundra.